The sounds of the normal heartbeat
are the closing sounds of the valves.
An extra sounds may be heard when
there is disease of the valve structures.
This is called a heart murmur.
This is a swishing sound caused by
blood flowing through a rigid valve
or flowing backward through a valve
that does not close properly.
Heart valves become diseased for many reasons
Including infections,
heart attacks,
Heart conditions since birth
and degeneration of the valves.
Valve repair or replacement is performed
when a heart valve is tight and rigid,
or hard to open (stenosis),
or when it cannot close properly (regurgitation).
The mitral and aortic valves are most often effected.
When valves do not open and close as they should
the work of the heart is greatly increased
as it works harder to pump the blood
through the diseased valve.
This causes the heart muscle to enlarge
as it works harder.
The overworked heart may eventually fail
causing heart failure symptoms.
These symptoms include shortness of breath,
fatigue,
chest pain,
dizziness,
leg swelling.
Medications can relieve heart failure temporarily.
Surgery is often needed to improve heart function
and relieve the symptoms of heart failure.
Valve repair or replacement
may be recommended before you feel these symptoms
if there are signs that the heart muscle is weakening.
Aortic stenosis
is the narrowing of the aortic valve
that occurs over time.
The leaflets cannot fully open
and your heart muscle must work harder
to move blood through the valve
to the rest of your body.
In patients with mitral regurgitation
the mitral valve does not close properly
allowing blood to flow backwards
creating symptoms of shortness of breath,
fatigue and leg swelling.
When possible,
your own mitral valve is repaired.
If the valve leaflets have minimal damage
the damaged area can be repaired.
If valve leaflets are severely damaged,
they cannot usually be repaired.
During the surgery,
a transesophageal echocardiogram is performed
to look at the valve function after repair.
If there is any chance the repair may not last,
the valve is then replaced during the same operation.
The advantage of repairing the valve
is that the patient will not require
lifelong anticoagulation
and maintaining the structure of your own valve
is better than a prosthetic valve.
The replacement valve will either be
a mechanical valve or a tissue valve.
The tissue valve is bovine,
cow pericardium.
Tissue valves are very similar to your own valve
and are well tolerated
and do not require lifelong blood thinning medication.
The disadvantage of tissue valves
is that they are less durable than your own valves
or mechanical valves.
Mechanical valves are the most durable
but are not natural to the body
and may cause blood clots to form.
Lifelong blood thinning medication
is necessary to prevent blood clots from forming.
Your preferences will be discussed
and considered while planning the operation.
Some people feel better right away
after heart valve surgery.
For most people,
it takes a few months to feel better after valve surgery.
It takes time for the heart to recover
from the extra work it was doing before the surgery.
Antibiotics will need to be taken before medical
or dental procedure for your lifetime.
Bacteria can enter the blood stream during dental
and some surgical procedures
causing an infection in the tissues
surrounding the heart valve.
This is called bacterial endocarditis.
Notify your physician before any
dental or surgical procedures.